Well, let me start with
the center-based programs
being the artistic director
for the Cultural Center of the Philippines (CCP)
there're already platforms
dedicated to developing playwrights,
of course, it's not
Virgin Labfest obviously,
which is meant really--
it's a playwrights' festival
more than anything else.
Putting the playwright
in the middle of this collaborative process
that we’ve been talking about
And hopefully,
which hasn’t happened yet
as much as we'd like to,
These plays are picked up
by professional theater groups
and make it part
of their repertoire.
We aren't that successful yet
in that aspect
and that must be
investigated why somehow
it hasn’t reached
that kind of dimension.
But definitely, VLF
has produced and honed
a whole new
generation of writers
who’ve written one-acts
and full-lengths, and even moved on to
television and film scriptwriting
and enrich its whole world.
VLF now is planning
to go regional
trying to establish
a VLF in Cagayan De Oro
to have a platform
for non-Tagalog writers,
other languages like Bisaya,
Ilonggo, and so forth.
That's one.
Second, we have what we call
the intertextual division.
It used to be called
the literature division
but we chose to make it intertextual.
The idea is literature,
but since it's a performing arts center,
it needs to interact
with performing arts
like music, theater, dance.
The written word has iterations
as spoken word, as multimedia performances.
There's the possibility
of something written to be performed
and interacting with different
performing art forms.
Third, our resident companies are there.
Specifically, Tanghalang Pilipino
which is supposedly
one of our groups
that should be able to mount original work.
Again, it's a bit lacking
because of the budget
and the number of plays
they can mount in a year
so their choices
also become very limited
in terms of,
from picking up from new works.
But definitely, the road
should lead there
in terms of new works,
whether one-act or full length.
Of course, publications,
we have the anthologies,
and at some point in the pipeline,
we're looking at online scripts.
Making available these VLF scripts
online for people to access.
We’re trying to start the PETA laboratory
which is every September.
We’re trying to do that.
It's not just for playwrights
it's kinda like a multi-disciplinary
It can be different.
- It can be dance, it can be whatever you--
- Devised work.
Devised, so it's not just one thing,
but that's one platform.
I had this conversation
the other day
and sometimes I think the reason
some of the stories aren't brought
to the bigger companies
because for PETA,
the ones we've produced,
have to be in a bigger place
and VLF was already
conceptualized as a small play
and to expand it
would really take time.
Going back to the idea of time,
we might need to,
in commissioned works,
have new playwrights,
and as Rody said,
give them more time to develop it
and no harassing
them whatsoever.
What happens
when we're short on time,
the senior writers step up
because I don't have time anymore.
This thing has got to be fixed
so Rody steps in, something like that.
I do understand.
I think it's really a question
of this possibility
to have more time
to develop the work.
Because if its going to enter
the season at the PETA,
you’re really investing
money in it and everything
and since we're not subsidized.
We have to recover
that money back.
There are things
that are given.
But what I want to do is,
I believe that you can develop
an audience for anything,
I'd like to believe that.
In the same way that we developed
an audience for other stuff.
I really think there
should really be a window
to do these plays
that you’re doing,
plays from VLF,
the text you like and so on.
But it's really funded,
you're given real money,
real time to rehearse, lengthy runs,
until you build an audience
that will come
and I think they will,
but you also need to invest in it.
I hope over time
we find ways to balance that.
Hopefully, do that to the lab.
I want it to be regular and longer.
So that’s the objective.
And also, how do we access
these writers for our other projects?
Let’s say,
for the arts for democracy project
that we want to get into this coming year
We want to work
with the regional theaters
and they should be creating
their own plays.
How can we access your writers?
So they can work with the groups.
So we can also connect them
with different activities already
So they have platforms to write for.
In a university,
can it be written by,
like a university theater festival
and all the writers are from VLF
We could have
that kind of thing
These guys are sometimes
semi-professional already
they're not all
fresh off the mold,
but they’re working with
the student groups.
That's the creative work,
it's like a university festival.
I think its also thinking
up of ways where
we can put writers in
particular platforms.
I always say this, I think if
Rody and Lisa have become
the writers they are
it's because their work
have been produced.
I mean it's not because
they were born perfect,
So they had to undergo a process,
but still had the time to write.
But they wrote and got produced.
So that’s my dream,
I really want to be able to contribute,
to create spaces for writers
because I really believe
you need to be produced.
That’s the only way.
Even if you fail it doesn’t matter
because you need to fail.
You need to see
your work up there.
If it doesn’t work,
well let’s move on, next video.
That’s the dream of how
can we get these guys to be produced,
It doesn’t have to be
a big production all the time.
But I think you should see
what you invested in,
with the design, the actors,
with a time or period, like that.
I hope we can find
platforms for it in VLF.
but I'll try within the framework
of PETA to make more space for you guys.
Sipat Lawin Ensemble is a company
that initiates programs,
projects for independent makers
who don't have
institutional backing
or don't have the usual support
from big companies.
2019 to 2021, the second installment
of Karnaval Festival will be released.
It's a performance
and social innovation performance.
If VLF is a festival for playwrights,
Karnaval is a platform
for prototyping new works
where writers and creators
from the different arts come together.
We do some matchmaking.
Then there's Lagablab
Artist Residency Project.
where various artists and writers
have the opportunity to work with non-artists,
for example, anthropologists
who need a board, or architects
Is this a grant or no?
Yes, it's grant-based.
Because we're an independent company,
whatever grant we get,
we share it to those
who can't access grants
because they don't have
files for the registration.
- Right.
- That's what we do.
Sometimes, space is really important.
The space and the people involved,
that's what's important.
So there'll be regional hubs.
There's a regional residency
in Mindoro and one in Baguio,
which is where you'll do
your work for a week or two.
But it needs to be funded
so that's what we're looking for.
Artist education
along with audience education
for the development of new works
were mentioned earlier.
The practices of emerging artists
are documented in their early years.
It's a documented series.
You can learn about various processes,
especially by contemporaries.
They say it's mostly
generational work.
But that's what we do,
we document artists
who might eventually stop
because there's no support for their works
but there's still interest
in the processes.
And that's what we encourage
once an online database is put up.
People could learn from them.
And there's a blank-ticketed
informal school.
We have a blank-ticket university
based on your socio-economic capacity,
It depends on how much
you can afford.
It's an informal school for artists,
and writers, and devisers
where you can study basic education,
such as history, arts theory, and so on.
Our experience with various artists
started either from entertainment or--
they're really good singers
but they actually want to write or direct.
But how?
It's difficult to enter UP
or the opportunity's pretty scarce.
At the same time,
they "want to do a feminist play"
but when you look at it,
it's very sexist.
With the basic things,
I realized I was privileged.
Other artists have the education.
To make that available--
even understanding
history, society is important.
Those are the platforms, residencies
where opportunities are
since development takes three years.
On the first year,
you pitch a work.
On the second year,
it gets developed.
And on the third year,
it could be produced.
So writers working
with non-writers,
we encourage this
kind of transmedia and intermedia.